# Programs

Programs (referred to as *Prog* in the codebase) contain a Mycelium Program.

A Program Type has a single parameter `l` which is the length in bytecode of programs of that type.

*Programs* are [Directed Acyclic Graphs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) (DAG) where each node in the DAG has an operation associated with it, and edges to other nodes which will be operated on.

All operations produce 1 output and each operation has a fixed number of inputs.
e.g. The `Concat` operation has 2 inputs.
The `ProductUnit` operation has 1 input.
Some operations do not take any inputs; these output a constant or a parameter from the context.

> You can read more about [operations](../2_VM/01_Operations.md) in the next Chapter.

A node must have an edge for each input as required by its operation.
These edges must refer to previously defined nodes.

The output of a *Program* is the last node in the DAG.

## Encoding
The DAG is encoded as a stream of variable sized nodes.
After writing each node to the stream, the encoder remembers how many nodes have been written so far.

```
| Node 0  | Node 1    |      Node 2     | Node 3 |  ....  |   Node n  |
```

### Node Encoding
Nodes must only refer to previously defined nodes, so if node 4 is trying to refer to a hypothetical node 5, that is invalid.  Node 4 could refer to nodes 3, 2, 1 or 0.
Instead of storing the absolute number of the node being referred to, the difference is stored.
A reference to the immediately prior node would be encoded as a `0`, and 2 nodes ago would be a `1`.  Nodes cannot refer to themselves, which is why `0` is used to refer to the previous node and not the current node.

Nodes are encoded as an 8 bit opcode and a [varint](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variable-length_quantity) for each input edge.  If there are 127 nodes or less between the referenced node and the referencing node, then the edge will only take up 1 byte.

```
| <-  8  -> | <- variable -> | <- variable -> | <- variable -> |
|  opcode   |    edge 0      |    edge 1      |     edge 2     |
```

Nodes specifying constants can take up more bytes, these nodes have no inputs and their opcode implies an exact amount of bytes to be read.

