# VM

The Mycelium Virtual Machine (MVM) is an abstract machine that defines the way in which Mycelium programs are evaluated, including how they interact with the environment.
The MVM is a specification for what computations must look like from the outside.
The computation can be performed in many different ways, across many different possible MVM implementations.
It is important that all MVM implementations have the same time and memory complexity for the same computation, and a given computation that interacts with the environment performs the same interaction.

## Programs
Mycelium Programs are specified as a topologically ordered list of nodes making up a directed acyclic graph (DAG).
In this format: each node in the graph has an associated operation, and can reference up to 3 nodes which have already been defined.
The last node in the list must transitively reference all previous nodes, and will be the result of the computation.

Mycelium Programs are like Arrays; they have a fixed len that is part of the type.  In fact, Programs can be thought of as Arrays of bytecode, where each element is an `Array[Bit, 8]` representing a codepoint.

## Expressions
If Programs are like Arrays, then Expressions are like Lists.
Expressions allow any Program to passed around with a constant type, just like how Lists allow any Array to be passed around with a constant type.

There is very little you can do with an Expression in Mycelium; they must be put into the context of a Lazy, Lambda, or Fractal in order to have a well-defined meaning.

## Context
All Mycelium Expressions can be put into the context of a a computational Value, which can then be evaluated.
There are 3 types of context. `Lazy`, `Lambda`, and `Fractal` contexts.

All contexts contain the following:
- A set of indexed parameters from `0` to `n-1`, where `n` is the size of the parameter set.
- A set of valid Ports.

`Lambda`, and `Fractal` contexts contain:
- A `self` parameter.

Lazy contexts have no parameters, and all parameters in an Expression must be bound when the lazy is created as there will be no runtime value for the parameters.

Lambda contexts have a single parameter, and all additional parameters in an Expression must be bound when the Lambda is created, except for the single paramter, which will be bound to a value at runtime.

Fractal contexts have no parameters.
`Fractal` contexts only allow programs with a subset of operations needed for expressing *Types*, while `Lazy` and `Lambda` contexts support general purpose computation.

## Store
Mycelium programs have access to memory via a *Store*, which takes *Values* and issues *Ref* to those *Values*.
Memory is fundamentally a mechanism of leverage for information.
It allows you to refer to a large amount of information with a smaller amount of information.
This means it takes memory to use memory, and every interaction with the Store leverages the amount of information you have transitively over the amount you have directly.
The maximum leverage ratio is `MaxSize / RefSize`.

The store allows retrieval of *Values*, using a previously issued *Ref*.
There is no ability to force a specific *Value* into the memory slot for a *Ref*.
The *Ref* is determined by the *Store* in response to the given value.

MVMs *must* maintain referential integrity of the Store.
No Value is allowed in the store if it contains *Refs* for *Values* which are not in the store.

## Ports
An MVM has a set of valid ports, which represent capabilities to access the environment.
*Ports* are passed around as value, but invalid ports, or invalid operations on valid ports can produce a fault.

The implementation of Ports is not defined.
Their bit patterns are random tokens, which will not work on other MVMs.
Within a single MVM, they can be stored and transferred just like other values.

> As a security measure, Ports are usually zeroed when they are sent or received outside the security perimeter.

## Root
The Root Computation is provided to the VM by transmitting a *Lazy* value into the VM.

The API for this may look different depending on the MVM implementaiton, but this is the expected way to setup a computation.
